

--- PAGE 1 ---
ZERODHA
__________________________________________
PERSONAL FINANCE - INSURANCE
__________________________________________
ZERODHA.COM/VARSITY
1



--- PAGE 2 ---
Table of Contents
1 Introduction 3-6
2 Perspective Incentive 7-10
3 The Nudge 11-16
4 Skin in the game 17-20
5 Dunning Kruger effect 21-25
6 A mighty defence 26-32
7 No free lunch 33-38
8 Gimmick or not (Part 1) 39-49
9 Gimmick or not (Part 2) 50-60
2



--- PAGE 3 ---
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1 – Overview
This chapter is authored by Shrehith from Ditto.
Most people in this country live on a tight budget. They donʼt have a large
savings corpus. They donʼt have an emergency fund. They donʼt have a lot to fall
back on. Even those with better financial security are wholly unprepared to deal
with the odd curveball life throws at you.
But this isnʼt their fault per se. If anything, this isnʼt a fault at all. People
shouldnʼt spend every waking minute of their life thinking of all the possible
things that could go wrong. And they shouldnʼt be living in a constant state of
worry and panic. It would be a sorry way to live. However, throwing all caution
to the wind wouldnʼt be prudent. As any good driver would argue — “Eyes firmly
planted on the street but for the occasional glance at the rearview mirror.”
You, too, would do well to check the rearview mirror every time.
3



--- PAGE 4 ---
Consider, for instance, a trip to the hospital. It can drain you physically. It can
drain you mentally. And it can drain you financially. The prospect of healing from
physical and mental trauma is already daunting. But to deal with a massive
financial burden as youʼre recovering from a debilitating illness can be crippling.
Some would argue that this is an isolated experience. That the government aids
individuals who genuinely need the money. However, reality tells a very different
story. Individuals in their capacity bear two-thirds of all medical costs. In some
areas, it can be as high as 90%. You donʼt get much help from outside, and even
when you do, you have to work hard for it.
In most cases, a single hospitalization can wipe out years of savings. In other
cases, it can push people into a debt trap. And itʼs not just the hospitalization
you have to worry about. Youʼll oen have to contend with various diagnostic
exams before doctors can determine whatʼs wrong. Post-hospitalization, youʼll
have to contend with medication costs. Modern treatments are costly, and
medical inflation usually peaks at 7–8% yearly.
To put it simply, falling sick can be an expensive affair. And it also has the
potential to upend your life altogether. It can prevent achieving true financial
independence and strike havoc at any point in your life.
Unless that is, you have a comprehensive health insurance plan.
This niy insurance product can take care of all your pesky medical bills, and
you wonʼt have to pay a bomb. It can stave off a crisis and help you achieve
financial independence. It is a lifesaver; youʼd expect most people to spend good
money on a comprehensive health policy.
However, that isnʼt happening. Most people donʼt consider these things
worthwhile, and even those who do, penny-pinch when buying a health
insurance plan. And if youʼre wondering why this may be the case, let me
explain.
4



--- PAGE 5 ---
1.2 – A game of cat and mouse
The basic tenets of a health insurance contract are relatively straightforward. Of
course, you pay a small fee (a premium) every year to cover all future medical
expenses, subject to some reasonable restrictions.
However, despite the seeming simplicity here, there are infinitely many
possibilities to consider. When you try to parse these possibilities, youʼll begin to
see why people despise the prospect of buying health insurance. Itʼs a chore. A
complicated mess of conditions and exclusions. A product that will abandon you
when you need it the most.
What should have been a lifesaver is thought of as a needless distraction.
But perhaps it doesnʼt have to be this way. Maybe the reason why people feel let
down by health insurance products is that theyʼre party to an unequal contract.
Think about it. When you accept the health insurance proposal, youʼre signing
off on an agreement you probably havenʼt even read thoroughly. On the other
hand, insurance companies have spent countless hours pouring through every
detail and word in the document.
They have lawyers draing policies that give them an extra edge during payouts.
You donʼt have that.
They have dedicated teams working on fine-tuning benefits. You donʼt have that
either.
They have experience on their side. You have none.
So it should be no surprise that you are at a disadvantage here.
Some would suggest that the only alternative here is to dra a custom contract
with the insurer, where you can dictate terms and conditions.
But that is not feasible. Insurance contracts have to be standardized. Itʼs the only
way insurance companies can sell policies to a large group of individuals. They
will turn their back on you if you insist on a custom contract. That means your
5



--- PAGE 6 ---
only option is to work within the confines of this standardized document. It
would help if you found ways to come out of this transaction relatively
unscathed even though the odds are stacked against you.
This brings us to this module.
Unlike most health insurance guides that try and walk you through the
definitions, this one will be structured differently. Instead of elaborating on the
terms and conditions, we will explain the logic behind imposing them in the first
place. Itʼs like the title suggests — This is a game of cat and mouse. When the
gong strikes and the claim is made, you want to extract every penny, and the
insurer wants to keep every penny. The only problem — the insurer has a
well-defined strategy to mitigate risk on their end, but you donʼt have one.
So the objective here is to equip you with a blueprint. A blueprint that will walk
you through the many ways in which insurers and their affiliates protect their
interests. A blueprint that will offer you a sneak peek into their minds, so you
know what to do when you have to make your purchase.
As Sun Tzu once said — The opportunity to secure ourselves against defeat lies in
our own hands, but the enemy himself provides the chance of defeating the
enemy.
And while insurance companies arenʼt quite the enemies here, they are worthy
adversaries who will not accept defeat lying down. They are prudent. They are
diligent, and most importantly, they are prepared.
So itʼs time you do the same.
6



--- PAGE 7 ---
Chapter 2
Perverse Incentives
2.1 – Filling the application right
This chapter is authored by Shrehith from Ditto.
A few months ago, a young chap came to us seeking help — completely
distraught aer his rejected claim. The individual in question had bought a
policy from a family friend — an agent. At the time, the man had intimated to the
agent that he had been diagnosed with throat cancer a few years prior. The
treatment had been deemed a success, and he was in complete remission.
7



--- PAGE 8 ---
But he was still sceptical of getting his hands on a comprehensive policy
considering the stigma surrounding cancer. To his relief, however, the agent
assured him that he would get his health policy without much issue.
And he did!
So by the time he approached us, he had already held the policy for five years.
And according to our estimates, we had paid close to ₹86,000 in premiums — a
substantial sum. These were the case facts. So, at first sight, it made no sense to
us that the insurer had denied paying out his claim. However, he soon confessed
that the insurer repudiated the claim aer contesting that his pre-existing
condition hadnʼt been disclosed earlier. That they were forced to reject the claim
citing non-disclosure of medical history.
Okay, that should explain it then. This is a matter of non-disclosure — an open
and shut case. Insurance companies are not obligated to pay when customers
donʼt act in good faith.
So we were just about to break the bad news when he interjected again. In a
rather curt tone, he argued that he had disclosed his condition to the agent but
couldnʼt find a mention of it in his policy document. He was perplexed by this
oversight. But as soon as he divulged this new detail, we knew what had
happened.
Humans are notoriously rigid, but throw some incentives in the mix, and theyʼll
become pretty malleable. Itʼs one of the reasons why the insurance industry is
built on a very competitive incentive structure. Itʼs a product few people want to
buy. So you have to have a rather extravagant commission structure. Agents
(including us) get paid a lot of money when we make a sale. And sometimes,
these incentives can turn perverse — forcing these people to do the most
despicable things.
The agent in question had played a dirty trick. He knew that our man was
unlikely to get a health plan with his past medical history. Insurance companies
donʼt mention this explicitly, but itʼs an unsaid rule within the retail industry.
8



--- PAGE 9 ---
Cancer patients are a no-go, even if they are in remission. No matter how high
you push the premiums, itʼs unlikely to compensate for the substantial risks
insurance companies will likely take when they cover somebody diagnosed with
cancer. And while this may come as a surprise to some of our readers, industry
incumbents (including agents) have known this detail forever.
So youʼd expect them to be honest with this information. However, that isnʼt
always the case. Some agents will tell you no such thing. Theyʼll convince you itʼs
not a problem. They want to make the sale come what may. And if they believe
suppressing material facts will help you land a policy, theyʼll do just that. Sure,
the insurer may stumble on this nefarious scheme. But that doesnʼt happen all
the time. And once the policy is issued, the agent stands to make a windfall, at
least until you find out that itʼs all a sham.
In this case, the agent in question likely concealed this detail to profit off the
unsuspecting individual. He filled out the application for the customer without
any mention of cancer. Now, consider that most insurance companies call
customers and conduct an independent evaluation if a pre-existing disease is
mentioned. But without any declaration, theyʼll likely issue the policy without
further intervention. In other cases, agents may coach their customers to hide
sensitive details. Theyʼll tell them itʼs a non-issue and coerce them to follow their
cues. And if itʼs a family friend — as was the case with our customer, most people
wouldnʼt think twice.
Another gimmick they pull off is the infamous age-premium discount. When
customers push for a discount, agents are le with no choice but to comply. But
insurance companies seldom offer such discounts. So agents do the only thing
they can. They fill out the application — only they take your age and cut it down
by ten years. 50 instead of 60, 25 instead of 35. It looks like an honest mistake,
but itʼs not. The premiums meanwhile drop substantially. It seems like a bargain
at the price point, but itʼs only because the agent lied on your proposal form.
This is why itʼs imperative for you always to double-check the application. If itʼs
an online platform, youʼll likely have to do it on your own or at least prompt a
9



--- PAGE 10 ---
sales executive to fill it for you. Youʼll have to be doubly careful if itʼs an offline
agent. Seek out the application and check for any discrepancies. Mistakes can
creep in despite vigilance. So spend some time combing through the
application, especially if you feel something is amiss. You can even call the
insurer directly if you have any additional concerns. But never trust anybody
implicitly. Because their incentives may not bode well for your ambitions.
10



--- PAGE 11 ---
Chapter 3
The nudge
3.1 – Understanding protection, cover amount and premiums
This chapter is authored by Shrehith from Ditto.
An average human spends about 8 hours of his day sleeping. About an hour each
day eating. A few hours are working, and a good chunk is doing nothing
significant. Most days arenʼt very eventful. They look the same. They feel the
same, and people go to bed expecting this routine to persist.
11



--- PAGE 12 ---
We are like chickens. A chicken fed daily has no reason to believe it wonʼt be
provided tomorrow. The chickenʼs experience will have it convinced that the
feeding exercise will continue perpetually. That life will move on just as it did
yesterday. But that isnʼt true. The hand that feeds the chicken will one day wring
its neck. And life will never be the same.
Itʼs an example that illustrates a classic problem that plagues the human
mind — Our lived experience gives us a false sense of security. It distorts our
perception of risk. And when bad things do happen, we are wholly unprepared
to deal with them.
When we ask people to pick a cover while buying a health insurance policy, most
people choose a sum no more significant than ₹2–3 lakhs. Ask them to justify
this response, and theyʼll oen fall back on their lived experience.
Hospitalisations are rare. And when they happen, itʼs the usual suspects doing
the damage — Malaria, a broken bone, or lousy appendicitis. Medical expenses
seldom exceed the ₹2–3 lakh mark, and a cover above this sum seems needless.
But this isnʼt a good way to think about health insurance. Sure, ₹2–3 lakhs isnʼt a
modest sum by any account. But it isnʼt a life-changing sum either. If youʼre ever
hospitalised for an ailment, you will likely be able to put together this kind of
money without an insurer. It wonʼt be pleasant, and it most certainly wonʼt be
easy. But itʼs something that you can hope to cobble together if you need the
cash.
What will cripple you, however, is the bone marrow transplant that costs ₹25
lakhs. Or the recurring cancer treatment that can push you to the brink of
financial ruin. Your only option then is to binge on debt or crowdfund your
treatment — Seek help from friends and family. If that doesnʼt do, youʼll have to
settle for the public healthcare system and see what they can do for you.
This sequence of events can fundamentally alter the course of your life. It can
leave you battered and bruised. So most agents will nudge you to consider a
cover that adequately protects you from these difficulties. Theyʼll draw up a
12



--- PAGE 13 ---
comprehensive list of treatments that cost well over ₹50 lakhs and goad you into
considering a hey cover. Theyʼll even draw up an imaginary use case — of a
confident Ramesh who opted for a measly cover of ₹ five lakhs and then went
bankrupt as he tried to recover from a rare neurological problem.
And while all this may seem like prudent advice, it is, unfortunately, a con.
This time, the hypothetical agent was nudging you to consider an alternative to
optimise his income. And not necessarily your health outcomes.
The reality is — we arenʼt like chickens at all. Chickens canʼt compute likelihoods
and probabilities. We do. And even if rare events can upend our lives altogether,
we can approximate the possibility of such an event ever transpiring.
Sure, there is a case to be made that the relatively inexpensive treatments (₹1–2
lakhs) arenʼt the ones you should be worried about. That itʼs cancer and the
transplants that do the most damage. But ask yourself this — How expensive do
these treatments get? What kind of money do people usually shell out when
recovering from such ailments?
In our experience, even the more expensive treatments hardly ever breach the
₹20 lakh mark. Youʼd have to struggle to find a comprehensive list of treatments
that will cost you more. You could raise a massive bill by staying in a deluxe
room at a luxurious hospital. But in most cases, people are prudent with their
spending.
When they find out their treatment could cost a lot of money, they find a hospital
(and a room) that fits their budget. So the likelihood of racking up a ₹50 lakh bill
is so remote that it may not even be worth considering at the moment.
Also, the agentʼs reasoning is riddled with logical inconsistencies.
At best, the idea that a ₹50 lakh cover will protect you from all difficulties is
dubious. What if you had to avail a treatment that costs well over a crore? What if
such treatments can only be availed outside India? What if itʼs a disease that
insurance companies donʼt cover at all?
13



--- PAGE 14 ---
Sure, you could try and optimise for these use cases. But itʼs a never-ending
cycle. I could always draw up a list of diseases and scenarios where your
insurance wouldnʼt protect you, and you would have to try and source a policy
that does.
There is no end to this. The truth is that no cover can protect you from all tragic
outcomes, and the agent, in this case, is simply trying to extract a higher
premium by heightening your anxiety.
Also, in most cases, health insurance policies offer you significantly higher
protection than you may have imagined. For instance, with a comprehensive
approach, you could get a base cover of say ₹ ten lakhs, a no-claim bonus that
could add another ₹ ten lakhs in a couple of years, and a restoration benefit that
would offer you an additional ₹ ten lakhs worth of protection.
All in all, youʼd be covering for most exigencies by picking a cover anywhere
between ₹10–20 lakhs without spending a fortune. Now some people will read
this: “If you can get ₹30 lakhs worth of protection with a ₹10 lakh cover, why not
go for something lower?”
You could. But bear in mind that healthcare costs donʼt stay the same. They
increase at about 6–7% every year, and within just a few years, the ₹5 lakh cover
may seem wholly inadequate. You could also try and beef up your body at the
time, but bear in mind that insurance companies will only let you do this if
youʼre in tip-top shape.
If youʼve made massive claims in the past or you have a heart condition,
insurance companies may not afford you that opportunity. So if youʼre seeking
comprehensive protection for at least the next ten years, then a ₹5 lakh cover
may not cut it.
But is there a case to be made for a little cover? Is there no utility once you go
lower? Well, of course not. As you get older, the risk of hospitalisation increases
somewhat disproportionately, and your premium could jump manifold if you
14



--- PAGE 15 ---
already have pre-existing conditions. So, a minor cover may make sense for
older folks if the tips look prohibitive.
Also, if youʼre in no position to pay these premiums consistently yearly, it most
certainly makes sense to pick a more petite figure.
Remember, the last thing you want to do is buy a policy, pay those premiums
diligently for a couple of years and then forego it altogether because you canʼt
put up the tips. We routinely hear from people who abstain from their policy
aer falling short of funds. On some occasions, you could attribute this
misfortune or a tight budget.
On other events, itʼs entirely attributable to the impossible burden of
ever-increasing premiums. And while you should be worried about both
outcomes, the latter oen catches people off-guard. Health insurance premiums
donʼt stay the same. Instead, they keep changing as you renew your policy each
year.
○ Every year, your premiums will increase 4–6% to counter inflation. As
costs of treatments keep rising each year, your insurer will bump up your
premiums by a similar margin to compensate for the added costs.
○ Your premiums could also increase if you are transitioning between
different age bands. Think of it this way — Some insurers will seek higher
compensation from a 36-year-old but settle for a lower sum while dealing
with people between 25 and 35. However, as you grow older and cross the
35-year-old threshold, they will bump up your premiums to compensate
for the added risk you carry. Insurers will have their price chart for
different age bands, and they will adjust your premiums as you transition
between them.
○ If the insurance company has priced a policy at dirt-cheap levels, they may
alter the pricing structure once they figure they canʼt turn a profit. Do note
that they canʼt increase prices arbitrarily but instead have to work with the
15



--- PAGE 16 ---
regulator if theyʼre to accomplish this. But it can happen and sometimes
come out of the blue.
○ What insurers canʼt do is increase your premiums because you claimed in
any given year. Itʼs essentially an urban myth.
But regardless, you will be expected to pay higher premiums each year, and if
you arenʼt confident about your ability to come good on this sum, you may want
to consider a lower cover. Aer all, some protection is better than no protection,
and a health insurance policy will always protect you, no matter the surface.
On the flip side, if youʼre still worried about the other rare events that can cost a
bomb, know that there are inexpensive options like Super Top Ups, which offer
substantial protection at an affordable price. Weʼll talk more about those later.
But for now, weʼll wrap this chapter by saying this much — Thereʼs nothing wrong
in picking a policy with a cover of ₹50 lakhs or a crore. If it offers you peace of
mind, do it right now. But if youʼre only doing it because an agent told you, you
must have another conversation with that individual.
16



--- PAGE 17 ---
Chapter 4
Skin in the game
4.1 – Understanding co-payment and room rent restrictions
This chapter is authored by Shrehith from Ditto.
Skin in the game — Itʼs an idea propounded by many people, but none more so
than the trader-philosopher-statistician Nassim Nicholas Taleb. To have skin in
the game is to seek symmetry.
If you get hurt, I get hurt. If you succeed, I succeed.
When you apply this simple maxim to a business arrangement, it will likely
benefit both parties. Look at all the examples around you. A pilot will likely heed
safety instructions if her life is on the line. A chef will probably keep a clean
station if he has to eat the food he cooks. A footsoldier is likely to follow a
general if the general is leading from the front. Your incentives and penalties
align with those you intend to work with. Thatʼs when you truly have skin in the
game.
But in the insurance business, things arenʼt so straightforward. When you buy a
health insurance policy, thereʼs a pure transfer of risk, i.e. the insurance
company is expected to compensate you fully during a medical emergency. You
can decide to splurge if you so wish, and insurance companies will be obligated
to pay for every expense you incur. You have no skin in the game once youʼve
bought the policy. And from an insurerʼs point of view, this is a massive problem.
They want you to be accountable in some way. They want you to be
penny-pinching at the hospital even if you wonʼt be paying the bill yourself. They
want you to have some skin in the game, and to this extent, they devise clever
schemes to protect their downside.
17



--- PAGE 18 ---
Consider, for instance, this case study.
Youʼre about to buy health insurance, and the agent pitches a policy with a cover
totalling ₹5 Lakhs. The price is reasonable, at ₹7000 a year, but you want to
haggle some more. And thatʼs when he drops the big surprise. He promises to
cut down the premium by 25% (roughly ₹1800/year) if only you agree to a 20%
co-payment clause. We will talk about what this means, but right now, youʼre
caught up in the moment. Saving ₹1800 is a big deal, so you sign off on the
agreement without giving it a second thought.
Unfortunately, nine months later, you suffer an accident. Youʼre hospitalised and
need extensive care, and the bill adds up to ₹2 Lakh. No problem. Youʼve got
insurance. However, the insurer only pays ₹1,60,000. They ask you to pay the
remaining ₹40,000 out of pocket and remind you of the co-payment clause.
18



--- PAGE 19 ---
See, when you signed off on the contract, you promised to share the load with
the insurer. You wilfully declared that youʼd pay 20% of the bill if you were
hospitalised. And now, you have to pay up.
When you start doing the math, you begin to see how lopsided this arrangement
is. You saved ₹1,800, sure. But you had to pay ₹40,000 because of the
co-payment clause. It would take ~22 years of premium savings to make up for
this fatal mistake. On the flip side, this is a massive victory for the insurer. Not
only did they manage to save ₹40,000, but they also got you to penny-pinch.
Once you realise youʼre obligated to pay 20% of the bill, youʼll cut back on all the
frivolous expenses. Youʼll book cheaper rooms.
Youʼll second guess optional procedures. You will request hospital personnel to
be prudent with their spending. But it would help if you didnʼt have to do any of
these. It would help if you only were thinking about making a full recovery and
not penny-pinching at your most vulnerable moment.
If anything, co-payments seldom make sense unless they are mandatory or
youʼre buying a policy for someone old with pre-existing diseases. In which case,
a co-payment clause can bring down premiums drastically. But otherwise,
youʼre better off simply opting out of this seeming “bargain.”
The other trick up an insurerʼs sleeve is the room rent allocation. Oen, policies
will have a cap on room rent — the kind of money you can spend renting a
hospital room. Imagine the cap is set at 1% of your sum insured. 1% of ₹5 lakh
insured is ₹5,000 each day. Thatʼs not a lot. But what if youʼre hospitalised and
want a pick a better room— one that costs ₹10,000 a day?
Well, of course, you could. But you have to do the math again.
Youʼll be staying here for a couple of days. So that means youʼll have to pay an
extra ₹10,000 (2 days*5000). Thatʼs not a lot, but two days later, youʼre
discharged, and your insurance company drops a bombshell.
Youʼll have to pay an extra ₹25,000.
19



--- PAGE 20 ---
What?
Well, their carefully worded policy document notes that most services rendered
in your room, including surgeon fee, consultant fee, other diagnostic exams, etc.,
will not be covered fully. Instead, theyʼll only pay a part of it because you picked
a too expensive room.
How much will they pay? Well, hereʼs their math. The cap on room rent was fixed
at ₹5,000, remember? Your actual room rent stood at ₹10,000. So theyʼll cover
half your room rent and half the cost of all the services rendered in your room.
For instance, if you have to undergo an operation, the surgeonʼs fee adds up to
₹50,000. Theyʼll only pay ₹25,000. The rest is on you.
These rental caps are a big no-no, and people now realise this. This is why
insurance companies are getting creative while going about their business. Now,
most insurers impose restrictions on the kind of rooms you can pick. Say — a
single private room and nothing fancy.
If you prefer something more expensive, you may have to co-pay a part of the
bill. And while a single private room could do just fine, you may want to consider
a comprehensive plan with no such restrictions. You tend to get better care
when youʼre admitted to a more expensive room. Youʼll have more attendants.
Youʼll have round-the-clock service, and you could also get a family member to
stay with you. Itʼs not a dealbreaker. But itʼs still food for thought.
Bottom line — Saving a couple of a thousand rupees by opting for a plan with
co-pay and room rent caps may seem like a bargain at the time of purchase.
However, if you have the money, you would do well to stay away from these
items.
20



--- PAGE 21 ---
Chapter 5
Dunning Kruger effect
5.1 – Understanding medical declarations, pre-existing diseases
and loading charge
This chapter is authored by Shrehith from Ditto.
The Dunning–Kruger effect is a hypothetical cognitive bias that alludes to
something like this— People, on certain occasions, tend to overestimate their
ability even when they may have little to no expertise on the subject matter.
Youʼve probably been in this position before — Youʼre talking to somebody about
21



--- PAGE 22 ---
cricket, and theyʼre waffling nonsense with the utmost confidence. You want to
stop them right there and humble them. But that would be not nice. So you let it
be.
But if we did the same thing in this line of work, i.e. if we let it be, then that
would have catastrophic consequences for everyone involved. The stakes in the
insurance business can be pretty high, and we must course correct when
customers walk on this dangerous path. For instance, many people we spoke to
(when building the insurance business) routinely talked about how they could
outwit insurers if push came to shove.
Let me illustrate this with an example.
Imagine youʼve got diabetes and have been on medication for a few years. If
youʼre trying to get a comprehensive plan, insurers will want to know about your
condition. They may even conduct an independent evaluation to see if itʼs that
bad. And once theyʼre through with all the checks, theyʼll impose a few
restrictions.
For starters, theyʼll likely impose a pre-existing disease waiting period. Itʼs a
cool-off period (usually 2–4 years) during which insurers will not pay for
complications arising out of said pre-existing condition. In this case — diabetes.
And they may even impose an extra charge — called a loading charge to
compensate for the risk theyʼll be taking on while insuring a diabetic patient.
You may have to pay more — 10–20% of what regular healthy folks your age pay
to get the same plan. In fact, loading charges go up as high as 150% on rare
occasions when you have an individual diagnosed with multiple illnesses.
However, armed with this information, you could now try and outwit the insurer.
Even worse, you may think itʼs prudent not to make any declarations regarding
pre-existing conditions in the first place.
22



--- PAGE 23 ---
Aer all, how will they ever find out if they donʼt insist you get a blood sugar test
done? And in the absence of any declarations, they wonʼt conduct an
independent evaluation either, at least not when youʼre young.
So you could potentially try and get a sweet deal by hoodwinking the insurance
company. But alas, this kind of thinking is riddled with flaws. Insurance
companies have been in this business for centuries now.
They have a firm understanding of all the devious methods employed by a small
subset of people looking to profiteer off this arrangement. Granted, they may
not call your bluff at the time of purchase. But they will do so when you make a
claim, and I suppose itʼs best if I illustrate this with another example.
Imagine you come down with a bad case of retinopathy. Aer treating crippling
diabetes for eight years, the blood vessels in the back of your eyes are now shot.
You need surgery, and you need it now. Your only saving grace is a health
insurance policy you bought recently. But as we already noted, you thought you
could outmanoeuvre the insurer by simply making no declaration about your
past medical history.
And itʼs going to bite you back at this point.
Because when you make a claim, insurance companies will be comprehensive
with your medical records. Theyʼll si through the discharge summary and any
other documents on paper to evaluate if you have a history of diabetes.
Theyʼll already suspect something is amiss since retinopathy mainly presents
itself in patients with uncontrolled diabetes. And once they go through your past
medical history, theyʼll have enough evidence to repudiate your claim. Sure, you
could try and fight back by going to the regulator.
Or perhaps take a punt by approaching the courts. But this is a battle that you
will not win. You wonʼt have time on your side, and you wonʼt have the patience
to fight it out. Itʼll probably be more expensive than the insurance plan itself. In
23



--- PAGE 24 ---
all likelihood, youʼll be throwing more good money aer bad, and itʼs not a
position youʼd want to find yourself in.
My point here is this — When youʼre making those declarations and insurance
companies take you at your word, theyʼre not doing so because theyʼre gullible.
On the contrary, they are playing this smart.
They know that they can weed out most frivolous claims at the time of
hospitalisation; if anything, this arrangement works in their favour. Youʼll be
paying them good money until you make a claim, and they can refuse to
compensate you when they find the slightest discrepancy.
A routine complaint from most customers is that insurance companies oen go
overboard with this kind of thing. That they refuse to pay out a claim even when
youʼre being honest with your declaration. Say you were blissfully unaware of a
pre-existing condition, and you only find out about this at the time of
hospitalisation; the insurer is obligated to pay out the claim.
But if you make a claim only a few months aer buying a policy, the insurer may
suspect foul play either way. And if your medical history lends credence to the
idea that you may have deliberately withheld information about your
pre-existing condition, they can repudiate the claim altogether.
Unfortunately, you canʼt prevent this sort of thing. Current regulations stipulate
that a claim becomes incontestable only aer eight years of paying your
premium. Until then, thereʼs always scope for debate, and the only thing you can
do is try and optimise your outcomes.
How do you do that?
Well, first thingʼs first. Declare everything — Even if you think itʼs insignificant.
Most customers withhold information not because they harbour malicious
intent but because they donʼt think it qualifies as a pre-existing condition.
Somebody with a history of hypertension may think itʼs insignificant to divulge
24



--- PAGE 25 ---
this information when itʼs under control. But if youʼre keeping it under control
using a medication, it qualifies as a pre-existing condition.
It doesnʼt matter if you think itʼs benign, so long as youʼre popping pills. Recent
surgeries and genetic conditions also count. If you had a crippling disease a few
years back but made a full recovery, that may also be classified as a pre-existing
condition depending on the timescale.
Bottom line — It would bode well for you if you were completely transparent
about your medical condition. The waiting period and the extra charge may be
unsavoury, but it wonʼt be as dreadful as seeing your claim rejected.
A point of interest: Since there is considerable ambiguity surrounding the
precise definition of the word pre-existing disease, the regulator has
standardised the term to avoid confusion. According to the guidelines,
Pre-Existing Disease means any condition, ailment or injury or related
condition(s) for which there were signs or symptoms and were diagnosed and
for which medical advice/treatment was received within 48 months before the
first policy was issued by the insurer and renewed continuously aer that.
25



--- PAGE 26 ---
Chapter 6
A mighty defence
6.1 – Understanding specific illnesses, permanent exclusions,
disease-wise sub-limits and blacklists
This chapter is authored by Shrehith from Ditto.
While some people have little faith in their insurers, others have an almost
unshakable belief in the might of a top insurance company. They are convinced
that the insurer will come good during the crisis — That they will pay your bills no
matter what. But once again, this is only partly true. And itʼs not entirely because
insurance companies are backstabbing, money-grabbing con artists. Instead, itʼs
because their model is open to abuse.
26



--- PAGE 27 ---
Consider, for instance, if youʼre diagnosed with a cataract. Itʼs early days, but
your doctor recommends getting surgery in the next year or so. And since you
have time on your side, you decide to offset all future medical expenses by
getting yourself a health insurance policy.
It seems like a decent plan — To have the insurer pay the bill at the time of
hospitalisation. And even though youʼll be spending a sizeable premium during
this time, you can take comfort in the fact that this sum pales in comparison to
the actual cost of surgery, which can oen be upwards of Rs. 50,000. So, itʼs a
win-win for you, no matter how you view this.
So how does the insurance company protect themselves from exigencies like
these? Can they rely on medical records alone to evaluate whether youʼve been
honest with your declaration?
Well, no. Because they donʼt have to, health insurance providers have another
line of defence . They impose a separate waiting period for a list of illnesses
where patients may have the luxury of delaying treatments. Think Cataracts,
stones, surgery to fix a deviated nasal septum — that stuff. During this waiting
period (2 years on most occasions), you wonʼt be able to claim if you were
diagnosed with an illness on this list.
Looking at the sample list of diseases (provided below), you may think that
insurers hardly cover anything during the first two years. People routinely
complain about the lack of coverage they receive despite paying the premium in
total, and itʼs a pattern we see repeatedly — once we tell them such a list exists.
27



--- PAGE 28 ---
However, this line of reasoning isnʼt very accurate either. Granted, the list may
look prohibitive to somebody who isnʼt intimately familiar with the medical
profession. Still, it only includes a fraction of ailments that you encounter daily.
28



--- PAGE 29 ---
Dengue, Malaria, a broken bone, cancer (in many cases), and heart conditions
are covered aer the first 30 days. Theyʼre not part of this “specific illness” list.
And so youʼll get comprehensive coverage on more occasions than one. Youʼre
genuinely vulnerable only aer youʼve bought the policy. For the first 30 days,
insurers wonʼt cover anything outside accidental hospitalisations. The precise
definition of what constitutes an accident depends on the company. Still, in
general, if you needed medical attention aer electrocution or a horrible car
accident, you could count that as an accident.
Even other insurance companies deploy another more sinister tactic to contain
their liability. Alongside the specific illness list, theyʼll also throw in disease-wise
sub-limits.
Imagine an insurer offers you a bargain deal — ₹10 lakh cover at a premium of
just ₹6,000 a year. Itʼs so good that nobody else can match this price. You are
sceptical, and you ponder for a while. But you go ahead with the purchase
anyway since he is a family friend.
And then, one day, your worst fears come true. A slipped disk forces you into the
operation theatre. You require extensive treatment. The final bill is hey—₹
4,36,000 — inclusive of all costs. But despite your ₹10 lakh cover, the insurer tells
you they can only cover ₹2,00,000. You are outraged, and you press for
clarification.
At which point they break the bad news — They have a cap on the total coverage
amount specifically mandated for certain diseases, aka disease-wise sub-limits.
For instance, for cardiovascular diseases — They only pay ₹2,50,000
For knee replacements — ₹2,75,000
For cataracts — ₹50,000
Bottom line — You were suckered into buying a policy that barely pays anything.
And while thereʼs no way around mitigating risks associated with specific
29



--- PAGE 30 ---
illnesses, disease-wise sub-limits are avoidable. You have to pick a policy that
doesnʼt feature such a thing, and youʼll be good as gold.
But weʼre only getting started here since this is just the first line of defence. The
second line of defence kicks in soon aer to prevent abuse of another kind — a far
more severe transgression. Imagine your liver is done for — itʼs beaten, scarred,
and in no working condition.
Your doctor will tell you itʼs a bad case of liver cirrhosis, and the only alternative
right now is to get surgery or a transplant. And if you were hoping your insurance
company would come through on the transplant, youʼd have to double-check
one thing — Howʼd your liver get so damaged in the first place?
In some rare cases, you could get liver cirrhosis through no fault. But thatʼs only
on rare occasions. The likely explanation is that, in your case, cirrhosis is a direct
consequence of chronic alcoholism. That your compulsive drinking habits gave
way to this tragedy. And hereʼs the kicker — Insurance companies do not cover
illnesses that precipitate as a consequence of substance abuse, drugs or even
alcoholism.
And this non-coverage isnʼt just specific to a certain period (as was the case with
particular illnesses). Insurance companies never cover this sort of thing, ever.
They even have a name for such categorisation — permanent exclusions. So in
effect, there is only one way to get the insurer to pay for the transplant — Your
doctor has to produce a certificate stating that your condition has nothing to do
with alcoholism.
Or you have to bear the costs on your own. And permanent exclusions arenʼt just
limited to substance abuse. It could be extended to a wide array of use
cases — ranging from those that seem pretty reasonable and others that are
borderline extreme.
For instance, insurance companies are known to exclude all sorts of cosmetic
treatments permanently, i.e. They wonʼt reimburse costs associated with fixing
30



--- PAGE 31 ---
misaligned teeth. Still, if you accidentally broke your jaw and need surgery,
theyʼll pay for it.
They draw the line (in most cases) by asking a straightforward question — “Is the
treatment deemed medically necessary, and does it significantly impair your
quality of life?” If the answer is no, youʼll have a tough time getting the insurance
company to pay up. And while this seems like a reasonable exclusion, others
may seem a bit extreme. For example, insurance companies are also known to
permanently exclude all treatments associated with external congenital
diseases —visible conditions present from birth.
Bottom line — You would do well to take your policy document and review all
permanent exclusions before you sign off on the agreement. If you want a
sample list, hereʼs something to get you going.
But wait, we are not done yet. The third and fourth lines of defence kick in to
prevent abuse, not from customers but from hospitals. Some hospitals are
notorious for overcharging customers, especially when they know the insurer
bears the ultimate liability.
They throw in frivolous expenses — admission charges, administrative charges,
extra charge for TV (when thereʼs no TV involved), monitor charge, 100 extra
gloves — this sort of stuff. This is why insurers exclude non-medical
expenses — oen tabulated as consumables. Some companies will cover these
expenses if you pay extra, but they are on the exclusion list in most cases.
Then thereʼs the fact that hospitals can also overcharge customers by inflating
the cost of treatment itself. Now bear in mind that most hospitals donʼt do this.
They play fair by and large. Sure they may recommend surgery when you have
other alternatives, but inflating the actual cost of treatment is a different
ballgame. Because then, theyʼll have to dabble with some very shady practices.
For starters, they could pursue a line of treatment that may not be appropriate
simply because itʼs more expensive. On other occasions, they may inflate costs
associated with intangibles — consultancy charges, surgery costs and other such
31



--- PAGE 32 ---
things- to extract a kingʼs ransom. But insurers have already accounted for these
things.
In both cases, they will have a “get out of jail card” since the policy document
states that the insurer is only obligated to pay for treatments deemed “just and
reasonable.” Theyʼre also only expected to settle claims when doctors pursue a
line of treatment that is considered acceptable by the medical council of India.
Ultimately, if the hospital tries to con the insurer, theyʼll walk out of it relatively
unscathed, leaving you fully exposed. This is why itʼs always best to get a second
opinion when dealing with expensive medical procedures.
And finally, some hospitals run illegal rackets — plain and simple. They may not
have the necessary documentation to run a licensed medical facility, or maybe
theyʼre known to have conned insurance companies in the past — by inflating
costs or forging records. So most insurance companies will also have a
designated blacklist — a list of hospitals they wonʼt work with. And if you seek
treatment in such a facility, they can repudiate the claim on most occasions.
You can find this list at the back of your policy document, or you could get an
updated list on the insurerʼs website.
So, if youʼre expecting the insurance company to come through every single
time, you may need to revisit that idea. However, once youʼre intimately familiar
with the nuance surrounding exclusions and waiting periods, you can better
navigate hospitalisations and the claims that follow soon aer.
32



--- PAGE 33 ---
Chapter 7
No free lunch
7.1 – Understanding Discounts, Family Floaters, Group Plans,
Employee Insurance policies
This chapter is authored by Shrehith from Ditto.
Everybody likes a good discount.
Are you looking for a new pair of jeans? Youʼll first want to see if you get 10% off.
Are you buying something on an online grocery delivery app? Youʼll want a
coupon code that gives you a discount.
33



--- PAGE 34 ---
Are they finalising an insurance plan? Youʼll probably try to get a discount here
too. Unfortunately, discounts in the online insurance space donʼt work the same
way discounts work elsewhere. There are strict guidelines on how insurance
companies can price their products, so youʼll be hard-pressed to see an agent
throw an extra 10% off on the premiums because you were nice to them.
Instead, youʼll see subtle differences in pricing across different channels.
Suppose youʼre buying insurance through an offline agent. In that case, itʼs likely
that you will have to pay a higher sum considering insurance companies will
have to compensate for the extra cost associated with running a brick and
mortar facility.
Put another way; you probably will get a small discount if you buy the same
product online. Some insurers will also have a different pricing structure within
the online sub-domain. They may offer you a small discount if you buy the policy
directly from the insurerʼs website while not extending the same benefit
elsewhere.
And this gives people the impression that it would be prudent to buy the policy
from the insurer without an intermediary. And that assessment, while
reasonably accurate, does have a few issues.
For starters, every channel partner that markets the product will fight back when
they see a price disparity. For instance, if an insurer extends a policy at a
significant discount to online customers, offline agents will hardly be able to
make a sale considering customers oen compare prices online. And as such, a
substantial discount would effectively dissuade offline agents from ever working
with the insurer.
Elsewhere, across online channels, this effect is even more pronounced. People
buying a policy through an online intermediary will almost always check prices
with the insurer directly. The intermediary is bound to lose when the price
disparity becomes evident.
34



--- PAGE 35 ---
And this is precisely why you rarely see any difference in premiums when
comparing prices across the intermediary channels and the insurerʼs website
online. Even when some products boast a difference, the discounts are usually
limited to less than 5% of the premium paid during the first year. So, anybody
promising you a substantial online value may be duping you.
But what kind of discounts are available to people? How do insurance
companies incentivise you to buy their product?
In some cases, you may get a discount on premiums if you prove that youʼre
living healthy. Many insurance companies incentivise people to walk daily and
also have an app to track progress. If you meet the quota over the specified
period, youʼll be entitled to a discount while paying the premium next year. Even
others may offer a discount to medical professionals or when you buy a policy
for 2 or 3 years as opposed to the standard tenure of 12 months.
But if youʼre still searching for something big, youʼll have to think differently
about insurance. Perhaps consider including multiple people in the same plan
and purchase what is called a family floater policy.
Think of it this way. A family floater policy covers you and your family under a
single umbrella contract. You can include several people in the same plan and
pay a single premium for combined coverage. However, most insurance
providers have a relatively narrow definition of what dependents mean. And
they only let you include your spouse and kids alongside yourself.
But despite this restriction, it is an economical option for people on a budget
since you can get these products at a significant discount compared to
individual plans. Granted, the flipside is that you will have a combined cover of
10 lakhs instead of having 10 lakh each, but if you can live with that, this could
be a decent option for most people.
The only niggling feature is that your kids must move out of the plan aer they
breach a certain age threshold. And as we already noted, you may not have the
35



--- PAGE 36 ---
opportunity to include your parents and siblings in the same plan. So if this is an
issue, you may have to look at other alternatives.
Alternatives like a group plan.
Group plans arenʼt like retail plans. You canʼt find them on the insurerʼs website.
These are customised contracts draed for a group of people with some
association. For instance, you could have a group policy for all of Zerodhaʼs
customers. Or you could have a group policy for all employees in a company.
But for illustrative purposes, letʼs assume we are talking about a group policy
floated by a bank. In this case, the group will consist of members who own an
account in the said bank.
Once the group has been identified, the insurance company will need to dra a
custom contract for the group. However, they wonʼt extend a policy to each
individual. Instead, they will offer a quote to the master policyholder. In this
case, the bank. The bank will then choose to price each policy, and thatʼs the
premium youʼll have to cough up.
Also, the features in the group policy will be tailor-made based on the
requirements of the master policyholder, and you will have little flexibility on
this front. The upside is that you get a better price, and on average, you could
expect to see a group policy sell at a slight discount compared to a retail policy
with similar specifications.
The downside, however, is that the pricing is subject to change — each year. And
the decision is solely at the discretion of the insurance company. Next year, the
insurer might reevaluate the pricing structure, and you might be asked to pay
extra if the group starts making claims beyond a particular sum.
Also, you will have your policy so long as the master policyholder survives. But if
the master policyholder decides to dissolve the group or if they cease to
function, then youʼll have a tough choice to make. The insurer will let you switch
to a personal insurance plan from the suite of products available to the retail
36



--- PAGE 37 ---
public. But they may assess your risk once again. If you have diabetes, BP or any
other disease, youʼll be asked to pay a lot more.
Some will argue that this is unlikely to happen with a bank since they rarely ever
go bust. And thatʼs an entirely accurate assessment. But not all groups are built
this way. Many companies float group plans while having little financial stability
themselves. And this could be deeply problematic for their customers, who may
not fully understand the implications.
But there are group plans that do make a lot of sense, and those are plans that
many of you may already be intimate with—Employee insurance policies. These
are group policies specifically floated by your employer to cover you and your
dependents. The employer will bear the cost of insuring you as an individual and
sometimes may also bear the costs of insuring your family — including your
spouse, children or parents.
Unfortunately, despite its popularity, opinions surrounding employee insurance
plans are deeply divided. Some consider this the holy grail of health insurance,
which are deeply sceptical of its utility. The truth is that both sides have a point.
Employee insurance policies are a godsend for people who canʼt get insured
elsewhere. This may be your last resort if youʼre a cancer survivor or somebody
with crippling heart disease. It is indispensable to your cause.
And then some donʼt want to put up with the waiting periods — 2 years, three
years, four years. None of that! They want their insurance to cover everything,
And they want it to work from day 1. So if youʼre somebody who desperately
needs immediate coverage, you must love your employee health insurance
policy.
However, thereʼs also the fact that employee health insurance policies arenʼt
always the most comprehensive products. I mean, I have to look at the
incentives here. Employers must extend a health plan to their employees
because the state insists on it. They are expected to shoulder a part of the
burden because there is a mandate from the top. However, the mandate tells
37



--- PAGE 38 ---
them precious little about the specifics. They can tailor the policies any which
way they want.
They could make it highly robust, i.e. put together a 10 lakh cover, do away with
other restrictions, and include outpatient consultations and maternity benefits.
Or skimp on the surface, clawback features, and add a couple of “ifs and buts” to
save on costs. And many employers do this. Their focus is on the bottom line.
And that is precisely why it always makes sense to read the fine print on your
employee health insurance policy.
Also, you may still want to buy a personal health plan even if your employer is
extending one. People oen switch jobs, dabble with entrepreneurship or
simply retire when they donʼt feel motivated anymore.
There oen comes a time in peopleʼs lives when they donʼt want to do the same
things theyʼve been doing all their lives. At this point, they may find themselves
at a crossroads if they donʼt have adequate protection. Sure, you could buy a
personal health insurance policy when you make this choice.
Still, oen, that avenue may not be available if youʼre already dealing with a
debilitating disease. Insurers may refuse to extend a health policy or, in some
cases, make it ludicrously expensive. So if you have some money to spare, you
should undoubtedly consider beefing up your employee health insurance policy
with a personal plan.
Because you never know when you may want to hang up your boots.
38



--- PAGE 39 ---
Chapter 8
Gimmick or not (Part 1)
8.1 – Understanding the gimmicks of Insurance
This chapter is authored by Shrehith from Ditto.
Insurance is a cutthroat enterprise. Everybody is trying to outcompete each
other. Itʼs all-out warfare.
In this domain, companies have to be creative. They have to have an edge. They
must convince customers that their products are best suited for the masses. And
to entice these people, theyʼll whip up creations with cows, bells and whistles.
On paper, theyʼll seem like an absolute bargain. And the sales folk will convince
39



--- PAGE 40 ---
you as much. But under the hood, these product features may not mean much. If
anything, they may be detrimental to your cause.
So how do you separate the wheat from the chaff? How do you know if the
insurance company is trying to shortchange you?
Over the following two chapters, we will draw up a list of product features and
see if they pass the scrutiny test. We will even offer a relatively concise verdict at
the end, characterized by two words — ”Gimmick or not.”
8.2 – Network Hospitals
Youʼve probably seen it already — Insurance companies boldly proclaiming the
thousands of network hospitals theyʼve partnered with.
One companyʼs website reads — 5000 network hospitals and counting.
Another one reads — 9000+ hospitals at your disposal
And youʼll see this pattern repeat across websites. Network hospitals, network
hospitals, network hospitals.
But if youʼre hearing this thing for the first time, youʼd be thinking: What on earth
does a network hospital even mean? And why are insurers stuck up on this little
detail?
Well, hereʼs the thing. Despite the “over-the-top” advertising, network hospitals
are a big deal. They can quite literally be a lifesaver. For instance, suppose
youʼve had a minor accident, and youʼre taken to a hospital just 2 miles off the
block.
If your insurer has already partnered with the hospital, hereʼs how things may
pan out. The hospital will ask you for your health card and note the policy
number. They may also seek to verify your identity to make sure itʼs you. Once
theyʼre through, the hospital personnel will inform the insurer that youʼre
40



--- PAGE 41 ---
admitted to their facility. Theyʼll furnish details about the hospitalization, costs,
and other procedural matters. And then theyʼll wait.
If they donʼt get a reply immediately, the hospital may ask you to put up an extra
₹10,000 — Rs. ₹20000 just in case the insurer doesnʼt come through. Aer all, the
last thing they want is to find out that the insurer has refused to pay the claim
and that you canʼt pay the bills on your own. They donʼt want to be taking that
kind of gamble. So itʼs a safety deposit theyʼll immediately reimburse once the
insurer gives the go-ahead.
Meanwhile, the insurance company will establish the claimʼs veracity for an hour
or two. Theyʼll want to make sure that youʼre not currently in a hospital being
treated for something they donʼt cover. And if everything checks out, the insurer
will pre-authorize a sum. Say ₹ two lakhs. Thatʼs them telling the hospital they
will pay up to ₹ two lakhs once youʼre discharged.
And thatʼs the crux of this story — If youʼre in a network hospital, the insurer may
settle the bills without you putting up a single penny. Itʼs called a cashless claim,
a godsend for people strapped for “cash.”
On the flip side, if youʼre not in a network hospital, youʼll have to pay the bills
and prepare for a rather arduous journey. Youʼll have to collate all the medical
records, fill out the claim form, and get the hospital to sign it. Put all the
documents in order. Please send them over to the insurer and wait for them to
evaluate everything. Answer any additional queries they may have. Furnish
other records that they may seek. Wait some more. And finally, aer all this time,
maybe the insurer will reimburse your bills.
This can be torturous, especially if you have a hey bill. This explains why
customers and insurers put network hospitals at the front and centre of every
“insurance-related” discussion.
However, there is something you should know. Insurers arenʼt obligated to settle
claims cashlessly just because youʼre at a network hospital. They always have
recourse. For instance, if they suspect youʼre hospitalized for a rather
41



--- PAGE 42 ---
complicated matter that could cost a ton of money, theyʼll be highly reluctant to
pay anything upfront.
So, many insurers simply decline to process the claim by stating on record that
they donʼt have all the information they need just yet. Theyʼll tell you they want
to run a more thorough investigation aer accessing your medical records. And
will consider your application once youʼre discharged, but on a reimbursement
basis.
On other occasions, their pre-authorize can only be described as “modest at
best” One customer weʼve dealt with had a bill totalling ₹ two lakhs with the
insurer only pre-authorizing ₹50,000 at first. He did eventually manage to get the
remaining ₹1.5 lakh reimbursed. But it was particularly disheartening at the
moment, knowing they wouldnʼt pre-authorize the whole thing.
So what do you do in such a case? How do you assert your rights? You need to
get hold of your insurer and press them for specifics. Let them tell you in no
uncertain terms why theyʼre refusing to settle the claim on a cashless basis. If
theyʼre only pre-authorizing a tiny sum, then seek out their rationale. If it seems
dubious, you can continuously loop in the Ombudsman. This may get them to
recon
an extensive rider. And most importantly, remember that a vast network doesnʼt
continually optimize. Youʼre optimizing for all outcomes. Your insurer could have
10,000 across India, but only if but only have ten hospitals in your city. So make
sure you get a list of all the hospitals in and around your area before jumping in
and making a purchase.
Verdict: Not a Gimmick
8.3 – Alternative Medicine or Ayush Treatments
Medical doctors donʼt usually like the moniker of alternative treatments. Theyʼll
tell you that there are only two kinds of medicine—medicines that work and
42



--- PAGE 43 ---
medicines that donʼt. However, insurance companies donʼt quite agree with this
assessment.
They make provisions for allopathic treatments and other alternatives that donʼt
qualify as such. Think — Ayurveda, Homeopathy, Unani and Siddha. And while
several insurance companies cover these treatments now, you should know a
few things about this seeming benefit.
For starters, youʼll only be able to claim if youʼre hospitalized in a
government-certified Ayush facility. That means a specialist has to diagnose
your condition, recommend hospitalization, and treat it as any other doctor
would. And in our experience, insurance companies routinely dismiss these
claims because they donʼt meet the burden of proof.
Oen people conflate wellness therapies with legitimate treatments since the
line is so blurry in this domain. A few facilities arenʼt equipped to deal with
hospitalizations, and insurance companies rarely pay these claims. So while the
feature may not be a gimmick per se, youʼd have a tough job convincing
insurance companies to pay for these treatments anyhow.
Verdict: Slightly Gimmicky
8.4 – Restoration Benefit
The original use case for the restoration benefit was honestly stellar. People who
bought a family floater plan oen moaned about the lack of protection they
received whilst subscribing to such policies. And you could see why they had a
grouse. When youʼre a family of 4 living together in the same household, the
risks are oen correlated. If covid affects an individual in the family, it might
affect everyone involved. If youʼre involved in an accident, itʼs likely to have your
family and kids alongside you. When tragic events transpire, you may have to
witness multiple hospitalizations simultaneously, and a single cover may not cut
it.
43



--- PAGE 44 ---
So insurance companies extended a restoration benefit, promising to restore the
Cover in total if you ever had to make a claim. So if you were working with a sum
insured of ₹10 lakh and spent five5 lakhs tending to your child, the insurance
company offering an extent of ₹ ten lakhs on top is a bonus. You could use this
additional protection if somebody else in the family were hospitalized again.
And since the feature had such a great pull, companies across the board began
marketing the restoration benefit. It soon caught on like wildfire, and a few
insurers began modifying the use to make it even more compelling.
Suppose you were inflicted with cancer and needed surgery. Thereʼs no doubt
that this is going to be an expensive affair. But the costs pile up as you go
through the chemotherapy sessions. This can be particularly taxing on your
financials — the same way itʼs taxing your body. So insurers drew up the
restoration benefit to make it more comprehensive. They extended the
advantage to individual policyholders to offer a little bit of extra protection.
But at some point, insurers began recognizing the added costs associated with
these acts of benevolence. Sure, they still needed to market the feature to
compete in a cutthroat industry, but they also needed to mitigate some risks.
And thatʼs when they dabbled with wordplay once again. The idea was to market
the restoration benefit across all channels and make it harder for people to stake
claim to this benefit by adding a few additional conditions.
For instance, some insurers will tell you that theyʼll restore the Cover so long as
youʼre making claims for two separate illnesses. In the example we quoted
earlier, the insurer would restore the body aer your surgery but then refuse to
let you use the extra ten lakhs if you had to undergo chemotherapy. Their
rationale for doing so? Youʼre using the benefit to treat the same illness. And
according to the policy document, thatʼs a no-go.
This effectively means the restoration benefit is practically useless for individual
policyholders.
44



--- PAGE 45 ---
Even other insurers deploy a more sinister ploy. Theyʼll tell you that theyʼll
restore your Cover. But only aer youʼve fully exhausted the protection youʼre
accorded at first. For instance, if you claim ₹ eight lakhs aer holding a policy
with a cover totalling ₹ ten lakhs, the insurer will settle the ₹ eight lakhs and do
nothing aerwards. They wonʼt give you the extent of ₹ ten lakhs as promised.
And if you were hospitalized once again, god forbid, with a bill totalling ₹ six
lakhs, youʼll have to pay ₹ four lakhs out of pocket. The restore benefit wonʼt
kick in.
However, now that youʼve exhausted the Cover, the insurer will give you an extra
₹ ten lakhs if youʼre hospitalized again. But since the likelihood of that
happening is relatively remote, you can see how the restoration benefit is
extremely limited in scope this time.
This is why itʼs imperative to read the fine print.
What is the insurance company promising you?
Are they telling you theyʼll restore the Cover with no caveats, or are they trying
to pull a fast one over you? You have to read the fine print.
Verdict: Not a gimmick, but “buyer beware.”
8.5 – Pre and Post-Hospitalization Expenses
You seldom visit the hospital out of the blue. Oen, thereʼs a sequence of events
that precede this eventuality. Doctors will commission various diagnostic tests
to see whatʼs wrong. Sometimes itʼll be a relatively simple affair. A blood test and
a routine checkup will do. In other cases, you may need MRI, heart scans and
ultrasounds before they can genuinely hone in on the issue.
Once youʼre through hospitalization, you may have to contend with similar
outlays again. Medication costs can be prohibitively expensive, and you may
need follow-up consultations before youʼre truly out of the woods. And if youʼre
not careful, these costs can add up very quickly. They can run into the thousands
45



--- PAGE 46 ---
and put a massive dent in your financials. Thankfully, however, insurance
companies cover these costs, and while they will market this as a niche offering
available only on select products, that is not entirely true.
Almost every policy weʼve reviewed covers pre- and post-hospitalization
expenses. The only thing setting them apart is the quantum of protection. Some
policies will cover all costs incurred during the 15 days that precede
hospitalization and 30 days aerwards. Other more robust policies will pay off
all expenses over more extended periods—for instance, all costs incurred during
the two months that precede hospitalization and six months
post-hospitalization.
Thatʼs the only difference.
So yeah, while itʼs most certainly an indispensable product feature, itʼs not
exactly unique to your insurer, either.
Verdict: Not a gimmick, but nothing extraordinary either.
8.6 – Day Care Treatments
Hereʼs a case study that we put together a year ago. A young man is out playing a
game of cards with his friends. Suddenly he feels a sharp cramp in his abdomen.
Itʼs odd, but these things always keep happening to him. So he doesnʼt pay a lot
of attention at first. A few moments pass, and the twitch is suddenly there again.
This time it doesnʼt go away. Instead, within a moment, the pain intensifies.
Soon, it becomes unbearable. His friends take him to the hospital. And aer a
quick inspection, the doctor breaks the news. Itʼs appendicitis, and they have to
operate on him immediately.
But itʼs not that big of a deal. The doctor assures him that heʼll be discharged the
same day. And although he requires some treatment, he walks out of the
hospital within 24 hours. Itʼs a success. But then comes the bombshell. It was a
brief stay but an expensive procedure. The bill adds up to ₹80,000, and heʼs
gobsmacked. He calls his insurer, hoping they will cover these costs in full. But
46



--- PAGE 47 ---
then they break the news. They wonʼt cover it. They tell him theyʼll pay nothing
since their carefully worded policy document states that they donʼt cover
treatments when youʼre hospitalized for less than 24 hours.
Think — Chemotherapy, Dialysis or, in this case, appendicitis.
And yeah, thatʼs it. The moral of the story here is relatively simple — Ensure the
insurer covers daycare treatments. Itʼs okay if they donʼt have an extensive list of
500 procedures. But make sure they cover the obvious use cases, at least.
Verdict: Not a gimmick
8.7 – No Claim Bonus
Remember how we told you insurers have an added incentive to keep you
healthy? Sometimes, they throw in incentives that may not seem obvious
initially. For instance, this little feature — No claim bonus. The idea here is
simple — If you donʼt make a claim any given year, then the insurer will tell you
that theyʼll increase your Cover by a certain margin depending on the conditions
they lay out in the policy brochure.
Suppose you buy a policy with a sum insured of ₹ ten lakhs and a no-claim
bonus of 50%. And you go an entire year without making a claim. At this point,
the insurer will increase your Cover by 50%, and you could end up boasting a
cover of ₹15 lakhs the following year if you choose to renew the policy. If you go
another year without making a claim, your sum insured will jump up by an extra
50% (over the base figure of ₹ ten lakhs), and youʼd have total protection worth
₹20 lakhs.
This is, in all honestly, an excellent feature.
However, there are a few things you should be privy to. For starters, the cover
expansion wonʼt go on forever. Insurers will cap it at a certain level. Weʼve seen
insurers go up to 200%. And weʼve also seen insurers go up to a measly 50%. It
depends on the plan you pick. Thereʼs also the fact that some companies claw
back your bonus if you do claim in any given year. So if you were to accumulate
47



--- PAGE 48 ---
all that bonus and end up with a cover totalling ₹20 lakhs, as we noted earlier,
youʼd be back up to ₹15 lakhs the following year if you do go on to make a claim.
And if you were hard-pressed to make a claim the subsequent year again, youʼll
be down to ₹ ten lakhs. Thatʼs the cap. They canʼt go down any lower.
So, a no-claim bonus is a good thing, so long as the premium is substantial and
the clawback doesnʼt eat away your gains.
Verdict: Not a Gimmick
8.8 – Domiciliary Cover
Imagine a deadly pandemic starts wreaking havoc. But your job forces you to
step out every day. And then suddenly, one morning, you wake up with a bad
cold. You are coughing incessantly. You hope itʼll go away on its own. But then
you have trouble breathing. Your condition deteriorates, and you are forced to
call emergency services. Only for them to tell you that they canʼt find a bed right
now. Your only choice is to pucker at home and see if somebody will set up a
mobile medical facility for you at your domicile, i.e. your home.
And if youʼre lucky enough to find a service provider, youʼll have to worry about
the cost. These things can cost a pretty penny and leave you in a deep financial
hole unless your insurer extends Cover for domiciliary hospitalizations and pays
out the bills on your behalf. People routinely ask us if they can get protection if
they are ever hospitalized at home, and while we answer in the affirmative, we
also tell them that caveats are involved.
For instance, domiciliary hospitalizations are only covered if the following
criteria are met.
1. You must have a condition that prevents you from moving into an actual
medical facility, or you could prove that you canʼt find a hospital bed in
town.
48



--- PAGE 49 ---
2. A medical practitioner must confirm that hospitalization is necessary, with
you having been hospitalized for at least 72 hours.
3. All costs must be deemed just and reasonable. Sure, this condition holds
for every claim you make. But itʼs especially pertinent here, considering
the service provider can oen supplement your care with needless
provisions. So youʼve got to be careful here.
And while there are policies that do cover such treatments without imposing as
many restrictions, we always see that insurers arenʼt particularly proactive when
dealing with such claims. They oen pull up flimsy excuses and donʼt always
come through. So if youʼre betting on this feature being prominent, maybe itʼs
time to reconsider.
Verdict: Slightly Gimmicky
49



--- PAGE 50 ---
Chapter 9
Gimmick or not (Part 2)
9.1 – Consumables
This chapter is authored by Shrehith from Ditto.
Hereʼs the thing — When you parse through a hospital bill, youʼll almost always
see line items that are a bit dubious. TV monitors, administrative charges, gloves
and masks for attendants, telephone bills etc. These are expenses that insurance
companies seldom cover since they donʼt have a handle on how medical
practitioners deploy these assets. The hospital could bill an insurance company
for 20 PPE kits, and the company would have no way of verifying this detail. This
is why such expenses are oen excluded. And since insurers donʼt cover these
50



--- PAGE 51 ---
costs, consumables can burn a small hole in your pocket as these items could
make up as much as 2–10% of the bill.
However, some companies will promise to cover these costs if you pay extra.
They will throw it as an add-on and maybe ask you to pay an extra ₹1000 or
something. Others will make the proposition more enticing by telling you theyʼll
increase your cover each year by a small margin to compensate for inflation.
All for a bargain price of ₹1000 or so!
So should you take this deal?
Maybe. Paying a nominal annual sum doesnʼt seem to hurt too much. But it can
quickly add up if you go years without making a claim. Even if you are
hospitalised eventually, consumables may only make up a fraction of the bill. It
may make sense if you get inflation protection alongside this benefit. Otherwise,
itʼs “touch and go.”
Verdict: Not a gimmick
9.2 – Critical Illness
Itʼs a no-brainer at this point. People are petrified of things like cancer and will
do everything to protect themselves from these difficulties. Insurers routinely
prey on this paranoia and push products that may be entirely sub-optimal. Take,
for instance, critical insurance policies. Most of these products only pay for
medical expenses you incur while being treated for a relatively limited subset of
diseases, i.e. acute illnesses. However, the only problem is — Critical illness isnʼt a
well-defined term per se. Is dengue a critical illness? Is a fracture a critical
illness? Or is there some other distinction that makes an illness “critical” in
nature?
Well, there isnʼt anything of that sort. Instead, the policy will list down a bunch
of diseases they will cover. And if somebody is hurried, youʼll only probably
51



--- PAGE 52 ---
glance at the document. Perhaps youʼll see the word cancer mentioned on the
advertising brochure and sign off the contract.
However, insurance companies are exact with their language. Theyʼll cover
cancer, sure, but theyʼll only do it if youʼre inflicted with cancer of specified
severity. So youʼd be well advised to read the entire list very carefully. The last
thing youʼd want is to buy one of the policies and then dispute the interpretation
of the language. And itʼs not a pleasant experience even if these policies sell for
low dirt prices.
Elsewhere, customers may have completely different expectations from the
product itself. Some customers we spoke to believed that these policies would
pay out a lump sum if they were diagnosed with a critical illness. They told us
they were expecting a payout of ₹ ten or ₹15 lakhs to effectively mitigate the
crisis that beckons when one gets diagnosed with a crippling disease.
However, health insurance companies donʼt oen extend such a benefit. The
ones that do are oen dubious since the pricing is subject to change. You do not
want to pay a modest sum for five years and suddenly find out that your
premiums have increased by a whopping 50% overnight. Itʼs not a great feeling,
so it is to avail of this benefit while buying a good term plan. That should take
care of that.
More importantly, Super top up is a more comprehensive alternative than a
critical illness policy if you only want to cover health-related expenses. They
offer an enormous cover with limited exclusions instead of an essential illness
plan that only protects you from a small subset of diseases.
Verdict: Slightly Gimmicky
9.3 – Top-Up Plans
Imagine a health insurance policy with a relatively small cover, and you want to
beef it up. You have two options in front of you. You could increase the sum
52



--- PAGE 53 ---
insured by a few lakhs and pay a hey additional premium, or you could buy a
top-up policy and get the extra protection you need at a relatively lower
premium.
By relatively low, I mean down. One top-up policy with a cover of ₹50 lakhs sells
for as low as ₹1000 a year.
However, like all things weʼve discussed before, they come with a few caveats,
and to understand them better, we need to understand top-ups better.
A top-up plan offers a sizeable extended cover aer the customer pays the
deductible during a hospitalisation. Think of this deductible as the minimum
sum you can pay out of pocket when youʼre hospitalised. If the deductible is set
at ₹ five lakhs and youʼre hospitalised with a bill totalling ₹12 lakhs, then youʼll
be expected to pay the first ₹ five lakhs, and the top-up will be expected to take
care of the rest.
Thereʼs no rule mandating that you must pay the deductible out of pocket. You
could also use another insurance plan to pay it off. But once thatʼs taken care of,
the top-up will kick in and settle whatʼs le, so long as the claim is valid.
Hereʼs another example of driving home at this point.
Suppose your employer offers you a health insurance plan with a cover totalling
₹5 Lakhs. Itʼs a decent figure, but thereʼs a possibility that you may want to add a
bit of extra protection. So you decide to buy yourself a top-up policy. And when
you do so, the insurer will have two questions for you.
1. What kind of cover are you seeking?
2. What kind of deductible do you want to pick?
The cover options are usually quite hey in the case of top-up policies. They can
begin at ₹20 lakhs and go up to a crore in some cases. So youʼll have many
options to choose from. Deductible options, on the other hand, are pretty
53



--- PAGE 54 ---
limited. Insurers may offer you the possibility to pick between ₹ five lakhs or ₹
ten lakhs, and you may not have the flexibility to bargain here.
A top-up plan with a deductible of ₹10 lakh is more affordable than a top-up
plan with a deductible of 5 lakh, all else equal. Itʼs a simple game of probability.
During a hospitalisation, itʼs more likely that youʼll hit the ₹ five lakhs threshold
instead of the ₹10 lakh threshold. Once this limit is breached, the insurance
company will be expected to pay off the rest. So a ₹10 lakh deductible will give
the insurer more breathing room.
However, in the example we quoted above, a deductible of ₹ five lakhs makes
more sense to you because thatʼs what your employer already covers. In the
event of a hospitalisation, you can use the first ₹ five lakhs from the
company-issued insurance plan and then use the top-up policy to protect the
rest.
It seems like an absolute bargain in; ain doesnʼt like it.
So whatʼs the catch?
Well, itʼs the wording. Top-up plans only pay out the claim aer you furnish the
deductible. And youʼd have to do this “each time youʼre hospitalised, a scenario
where things can go wrong if you fully trust this inexpensive product. Suppose
you have a bill totalling ₹ seven lakhs aer you are discharged from a medical
facility. At this point, you can pay the first ₹ five lakhs using an employee
insurance policy and the next ₹ two lakhs using the top-up plan, and everything
works just fine. But letʼs suppose youʼre hospitalised again aer a couple of
months. This time youʼll have to pay the deductible again if you wish to put the
top-up plan to good use.
This means that the product is extremely limited in its scope. Imagine going to
the hospital and finding out that your top-up wonʼt kick in because youʼve only
incurred a bill of ₹ three lakhs. It can be particularly distressing to know that you
must pay the deductible once again when youʼve already exhausted the
employee insurance policy.
54



--- PAGE 55 ---
So it doesnʼt matter if you have a top-up policy with a cover totalling ₹50 lakhs. It
will not come in handy when you need it the most.
Verdict: Highly Gimmicky
9.4 – Super Top Up Plans
Super top-up plans were built to alleviate some of the big problems that
plagued top-up plans. The idea was to ostracise the recurring deductible feature
and make it more usable. They said that paying the deductible once should be
good enough, and thatʼs how the product came to be. Itʼs slightly more
expensive when compared to top-up plans but infinitely more usable.
Letʼs go back to the example we quoted earlier. Suppose you have a bill totalling
₹ seven lakhs aer you are discharged from a medical facility. And you have a
super top-up plan with a deductible of five of ₹ five lakhs. You leverage the
employee insurance plan and pay the first ₹ five l, lakhs an awesome super
top-up will pay out the next two lakhs.
Great.
But then, imagine you have to go back to the hospital once again, and youʼre
asked to pay up another three3 lakhs aer a brief stay at the hospital. The
top-up plan would have asked you to pay the deductible once more and,
consequently, forced you to put up the ₹ three lakhs yourself. But the super
top-up plan will do no such thing. It will settle three,e ₹ three lakhs and wonʼt
ask you to pay the deductible once again since you already did it the last time. It
doesnʼt even matter what the bill is. Even if itʼs a whopping ₹ ten lakhs, the super
top will take care of it, so long as you have a hey cover. Itʼs really.
The only thing to remember is this: Make sure that you buy the super top-up
policy right around the time you renew the employee insurance plan. The dates
have to line up. If they donʼt, thereʼs a possibility that things may not work out
well for you. Hereʼs an example
55



--- PAGE 56 ---
January 3rd 2021: You buy a super top-up plan with a ₹5 lakh deductible for
some added protection.
March 3rd 2021: Your employee insurance plan is up for renewal. You pay the
premium, and a new term begins. The policy will be in force until March 3rd
2022.
December 20th 2022: Youʼre hospitalised and expected to pay ₹ five lakhs. The
employee insurance policy takes care of the bill. The deductible is paid out.
January 3rd 2022: You renew the super top-up policy, and the contract will now
be in force until January 3rd 2023.
February 20th 2022: Youʼre hospitalised once again, and you must pay up to ₹
three lakhs.
However, you canʼt use the super top-up policy right now because you havenʼt
paid the deductible during this policy term. Sure, you were only hospitalised a
couple of months earlier, and you did pay ₹ five lakhs then. But you renewed
your super top-up policy aerwards. A new term has begun, and a new contract
is in place. So youʼre expected to pay the deductible once again if you want to
put the super top-up plan to good use.
Also, note that these products are selling at dirt-cheap prices. And if thereʼs
anything weʼve learnt so far, thereʼs no such thing as a free lunch. We donʼt think
the pricing is sustainable, and a correction may be due soon.
Verdict: Not a gimmick, but make sure the stars line up.
9.5 – Claim Settlement Ratio
The industryʼs most famous figure, the Claim settlement ratio, tells you about
the percentage of claims settled by an insurer during a specified period. Put
another way, a claim settlement ratio of 90 means that the insurance company
paid 90 shares for every 100 claims they book during the year.
56



--- PAGE 57 ---
This one isnʼt a gimmick. If anything, you should use this as a metric to gauge if
your insurer will come through in your hour of need. However, insurers routinely
play fast and loose with this number.
Take, for instance, this egregious case. For 2018–2019, one public insurer
reported an obscenely high claim settlement ratio.
This figure was calculated using the formula: Claims settled / (Claims booked +
Claims outstanding at the beginning – Claims outstanding at the end). And if you
pay close attention here, you can see how you can pull out a high ratio, even
without expediting claims.
Letʼs suppose the insurer has a boatload of pending cases at the beginning of
the year. And letʼs assume most of them were settled over the next 365 days.
Then you donʼt need to pay any claims booked during the year so long as you
dispose of cases from last year. Youʼll still have a comfortably high ratio despite
not being customer-centric. Effectively, the extensive CSR is a damning
indictment of the companyʼs operational inefficiencies. It tells you precious little
about their actual settlement processes and gives you an honest assessment of
their ineptitude. So if youʼre basing your decision solely on this nugget, maybe
you should think twice.
Thereʼs also the fact that general insurers (insurers that dabble in health, life,
motor etc.) report settlement figures for all their businesses together. In
contrast, standalone health insurance companies say settlement figures for the
health business alone (since they donʼt dabble in anything else). So a company
may boast a high settlement ratio by paying out all the motor insurance claims
while skimping on the health claims. In this case, you may want to ask your
insurer for more specific numbers before making a decision.
Finally, remember that the claim settlement ratio tells you little about the
amount settled. A high number is generally a sign of good things to come. But
insurers can easily game the system if theyʼre deceptive in how they do their
business. For instance, some insurers will pay out the inconsequential claims
57



--- PAGE 58 ---
while repudiating the significant money cases. This way, they can settle more
claims without paying as much. So you could quickly be misled if you looked at
the claim settlement ratio alone.
Instead, it would help if you looked at the claim settlement ratio in conjunction
with another figure called the incurred claims ratio.
That is — You take the total claims paid out by an insurer during the year and
then divide it by the premiums they collect during the same period, and voila,
you get ICR. Most people use this figure to see if their insurer is financially stable,
i.e. If thereʼs a company paying out ₹120 in claims while only collecting ₹100 in
net premiums, you can safely assume that the insurer is losing money. And if this
pattern persists, then thereʼs a genuine risk they may go under.
But this isnʼt a reason to panic. The regulator wonʼt just let the company die and
leave all the policyholders in a lurch. Instead, they will jump in and force a
merger. However, it can be an unsavoury experience. So a high ICR is most
certainly not a good thing.
However, a low ICR isnʼt something you should be looking forward to either.
If you have a company thatʼs paying out ₹50 in claims for every ₹100 they collect
in premiums, it could indicate the insurer may be penny-pinching while paying
out the big claims. This is why looking at the claim settlement ratio alongside
ICR is essential. It gives you a more holistic assessment of whoʼs better when
looking aer your interest.
Finally, insurance companies can easily boast high settlement figures while
dealing with a few thousand clients. The real test is to settle claims when dealing
with millions of clients. This is why itʼs imperative to see if youʼre insurer is
dealing with a large customer base. If that isnʼt the case, the new figures may go
for a toss as the company scales and expands.
58



--- PAGE 59 ---
Verdict: Claim Settlement Ratio is not a gimmick, but you need much more
context before making a choice. You can find the most accurate numbers in
IRDAIʼs annual report.
9.6 – Porting
When you figure your insurance is no good, you have two options in front of you.
You can ditch it and buy a new plan or port your policy.
To the layperson, this may come as a surprise, but they are, in fact, two very
different things. When youʼre buying a new policy, itʼs a fresh start for all parties
involved, as discussed earlier. Do you have a pre-existing disease? Waitthree3
years before making a claim? Do you want to get your cataracts sorted? Wait two
years. You want to claim aer 20 days of buying the policy. Sorry, youʼve got to
wait some more.
It cannot be very pleasant. And it can be particularly irritating if youʼve already
done their bidding once. If youʼve had a policy for three years, youʼd likely have
fully complied with all the restrictions. When you want to switch and buy a new
approach, the insurer wants you to do the same thing again. Preposterous.
This is why most people choose to port their policy. When you port a policy, you
can carry over some of the benefits from your erstwhile insurer.
The most obvious benefit is that you wonʼt have to put up with the waiting
periods once again. For instance, someone looking to port aer having held a
policy for five years. The chap has had crippling diabetes for almost a decade
now. And the previous insurer imposed a three-year waiting period before
covering diabetes, a 2-year waiting period for specific illnesses and a 3030-day
waiting period for non-accidental hospitalisations. And so, when he ports to a
policy that imposes similar constraints again, he can tell them heʼs done it
already.
Thatʼs it. The new insurer will cover all complications from day one unless itʼs
expressly excluded in the contract.
59



--- PAGE 60 ---
However, you do have to remember a few things. For starters, you canʼt port a
policy anytime you wish. Thereʼs a porting window — of 45–60 days before you
renew your policy once again. This is when you go to a new insurer and tell them
you intend to begin the process. Second, you canʼt expect the new playtester to
waive off all waiting periods just because someone vouches for you.
Itʼs incumbent on you to prove this with material documents on record. If you
want the specific illness waiting period waived, you must show them that youʼve
held the old policy for at least two years. Suppose you toh for have had the three
years pre-existing disease waiting period waived off. In that case, youʼve to
produce documents showing that youʼve held the old policy for three years,
explicitly mentioning the pre-existing condition. If itʼs a new condition you only
recently discovered, you canʼt expect the insurer to waive off the waiting
periods. A mention of this disease will have to be made on the policy document,
and thatʼs the only one that works.
Finally, if youʼve held a policy with a sum insured of 5 lakhs (no Bonus included)
and youʼre now porting to something with a slightly more extensive cover— say
ten lakhs, then the waiting periods will only be waived off for the first five lakhs.
Put another way; all complications will be covered from day one so long as the
bill tallies up to about five lakhs. If it breaches this threshold, the insurer will pay
off the first five lakhs and see if they are obligated to pay the rest instead of the
waiting periods imposed on the additional cover.
So, porting is almost always a more prudent alternative, and you should always
consider this while buying a new policy.
Verdict: Not a Gimmick
60
